NEP-408: Injected Wallet API (#408)
near/NEPs: specs/Standards/Wallets/InjectedWallets.md

- Generally, it is recommended to only keep `FullAccess` keys in wallet scope and hidden from the dApp consumer. `FunctionCall` type keys should be generated and owned by the dApp, and requested to be added using the `signIn` method. They should **not** be 'hidden' inside the wallet in the way that `FullAccess` type keys are.

## Specification

Injected wallets are typically browser extensions that implement the `Wallet` API (see below).  References to the currently available wallets are tracked on the `window` object. To avoid namespace collisions and easily detect when they're available, wallets must mount under their own key of the object `window.near` (e.g. `window.near.sender`).

> **NOTE: Do not replace the entire `window.near` object with your wallet implementation, or add any objects as properties of the `window.near` object that do not conform to the Injected Wallet Standard**

Reviewer: What's advantage and disadvantage of mounting the `Wallet` object at `window.near` here?

I think developers who're familiar with Ethereum may prefer to use `window.near` as the root of the Wallet API, as long as they can switch among the providers.

const provider = new providers.JsonRpcProvider({ url: network.nodeUrl });

const signedTxs = await window.near.wallet.signTransactions({
  transactions: [
    {
        signerId: accounts[0].accountId,
        receiverId: "guest-book.testnet",
        actions: [transactions.functionCall(
            "addMessage",
            { text: "Hello World! (1/2)" },
            utils.format.parseNearAmount("0.00000000003"),
            utils.format.parseNearAmount("0.01")
        )]
    },
    {
        signerId: accounts[0].accountId,
        receiverId: "guest-book.testnet",
        actions: [transactions.functionCall(
            "addMessage",
            { text: "Hello World! (2/2)" },
            utils.format.parseNearAmount("0.00000000003"),
            utils.format.parseNearAmount("0.01")
        )]
    }
  ]
}); 

for (let i = 0; i < signedTxs.length; i += 1) {
  const signedTx = signedTxs[i];
  
  // Send the transaction to the blockchain.
  await provider.sendTransaction(signedTx);
}
```

##### `disconnect`

Remove visibility of all accounts from the wallet.

```ts
await window.near.wallet.disconnect();
```

##### `signIn`

> Add `FunctionCall` access key(s) for one or more accounts. This request should require explicit approval from the user.

Reviewer: How does the application get access to the created function call key after `signIn`?

Reviewer 2: I was wondering the same- but after looking through the interface, the dapp key's `publicKey` is set inside the `Account` data structure which is passed to the `signIn()` method.

await window.near.wallet.signIn({
  permission: {
    receiverId: "guest-book.testnet",
    methodNames: [],
  },
  accounts: accounts.map(({ accountId }) => {
    const keyPair = utils.KeyPair.fromRandom("ed25519");

    return {
      accountId,
      publicKey: keyPair.getPublicKey()
    };
  }),
});
```

##### `signOut`

Delete `FunctionCall` access key(s) for one or more accounts. This request should require explicit approval from the user.

```ts
import { utils, keyStores } from "near-api-js";

// Setup keystore to retrieve locally stored FunctionCall access keys.
const keystore = new keyStores.BrowserLocalStorageKeyStore();

// Retrieve accounts (assuming already connected) and current network.
const { network, accounts } = window.near.wallet;

// Remove FunctionCall access (previously granted via signIn) for each account.
await window.near.wallet.signOut({
  accounts: await Promise.all(
    accounts.map(async ({ accountId }) => {
      const keyPair = await keystore.getKey(network.networkId, accountId);

      return {
        accountId,
        publicKey: keyPair.getPublicKey()
      };
    })
  ),
});
```

#### Events

> ##### `accountsChanged`

Reviewer: We may want to include more events such as `networkChanged`.

- Generally, it is recommended to only keep `FullAccess` keys in wallet scope and hidden from the dApp consumer. `FunctionCall` type keys should be generated and owned by the dApp, and requested to be added using the `signIn` method. They should **not** be 'hidden' inside the wallet in the way that `FullAccess` type keys are.

## Specification

Injected wallets are typically browser extensions that implement the `Wallet` API (see below).  References to the currently available wallets are tracked on the `window` object. To avoid namespace collisions and easily detect when they're available, wallets must mount under their own key of the object `window.near` (e.g. `window.near.sender`).
**NOTE: Do not replace the entire `window.near` object with your wallet implementation, or add any objects as properties of the `window.near` object that do not conform to the Injected Wallet Standard**

> At the core of a wallet are [`signTransaction`](#signtransaction) and [`signTransactions`](#signtransactions). These methods, when given a [`Transaction`](https://nomicon.io/RuntimeSpec/Transactions) instance from [`near-api-js`](https://github.com/near/near-api-js), will prompt the user to sign with a key pair previously imported (with the assumption it has [`FullAccess`](https://nomicon.io/DataStructures/AccessKey) permission).

Author: Good catch! <3

### Wallet API

Below is the entire API for injected wallets. It makes use of `near-api-js` to enable interoperability with dApps that will already use it for constructing transactions and communicating with RPC endpoints.

```ts
import { transactions, utils } from "near-api-js";

interface Account {
  accountId: string;
  publicKey: utils.PublicKey;
}

interface Network {
  networkId: string;
  nodeUrl: string;
}

interface SignInParams {
  permission: transactions.FunctionCallPermission;
  accounts: Array<Account>;
}

interface SignOutParams {
  accounts: Array<Account>;
}

interface TransactionOptions {
    receiverId: string;
    actions: Array<transactions.Action>;
    signerId?: string;
}

interface SignTransactionParams {
  transaction: TransactionOptions;
}

interface SignTransactionsParams {
  transactions: Array<TransactionOptions>;
}

interface Events {
  accountsChanged: { accounts: Array<Account> };
}

interface ConnectParams {
    networkId: string;
}

type Unsubscribe = () => void;

> interface Wallet {

Reviewer 2: As @PinkiNice and I mentioned in the previous NEP version (https://github.com/near/NEPs/pull/370#discussion_r987196550):

I think it could be good to also allow wallets to list their supported Networks. As this would allow dApps to avoid trying to `connect()` to wallets that don't support their app network.

It could be good to include a property in the Wallet interface such as:

```ts
interface Wallet {
  supportedNetworkIds: string[];
}
```

Or maybe something easier for the dApp to consume, like a function they can call:

```ts
type SupportsNetwork = (networkId: string) => boolean;

interface Wallet {
  // ...
  supportsNetwork: SupportsNetwork ;
}
```

Author: :+1: Thanks for the heads up -- I've added the `supportsNetwork` function to the standard; I like the idea of a function in this case rather than a static array as it feels more flexible and the dApp is probably going to know what networkId they are checking for support of.

I defined it as an async method that resolved to a boolean rather than the sync method you had sketched out, for flexibility on the wallet side for how it determines if a passed networkId is supported.  This should insulate us from needing to make a breaking API change or fragment the API if a wallet implementor needs to do something async 'behind the scenes' in order to to determine the result of this call.

  id: string;
  connected: boolean;
  network: Network;
  accounts: Array<Account>;
  

>   connect(params: ConnectParams): Promise<Array<Account>>;

Reviewer 2: _I'll copy my message from the previous issue ( https://github.com/near/NEPs/pull/370#discussion_r996990360 )- so we can keep the discussion here now._

Hi @MaximusHaximus - thanks for taking Network into consideration with the `connect()` method.

> @lostpebble Does this address your concerns here, or do you think that adding occupancy as an argument to the connect() method is still a requirement for this to be reasonable, keeping in mind that if we do add that option, wallet providers implementation and UI will become more complex.

I think its okay to leave it out- as long as its always okay for a user to only select a single account to connect with. If you think certain dApps might require the user to connect with multiple (or a certain amount) of accounts, for whatever reason, then having an `occupancy` option might be a good idea so the wallet can show the relevant UI. But I don't think should ever be the case?

This "multi-account" concept does complicate the Wallet UI a bit though. I guess in our case, when a Dapp calls the `connect({ network: "testnet" })` method, we'll show the user an interface that allows them to do one of the following:

* Select a single testnet account
* Select multiple specific testnet accounts
* Connect with all known wallet testnet accounts

We'll have to think of ways of streamlining such an interface.

And after that, I would suppose that future calls to `verifyOwner()` do not require any further prompts from the user (since they've already allowed the connection). But `signIn()` would run the specific sign-in flow for the account the dApp has chosen to use.

Author: @lostpebble Yup -- It's totally fine for the wallet side implementor to just create a UI that only allows a single account to be selected -- they just need to return that single account back to the caller in an array so that the datatype is consistent and forward-compatible with the idea of multiple accounts being connected to a dApp from a single wallet instance.

If you want some inspiration as far as how this looks in action in a PoC, take a look at the WalletConnect v2 PoC that @lewis-sqa created.

He implemented a [basic 'wallet' UI](https://github.com/lewis-sqa/web-examples/tree/SQC-170/bridge-wallet-poc) and [associated guestbook dApp](https://github.com/near/wallet-selector/tree/SQC-170/bridge-wallet-poc) that supports multiple accounts on the connect() call (this is how WalletConnect works in all cases).

I'll mark this one resolved -- thanks so much for your feedback & opinions <3 👍

const { network, accounts } = window.near.wallet;

// Setup RPC to retrieve transaction-related prerequisites.
const provider = new providers.JsonRpcProvider({ url: network.nodeUrl });

const [block, accessKey] = await Promise.all([
  provider.block({ finality: "final" }),
  provider.query<AccessKeyView>({
    request_type: "view_access_key",
    finality: "final",
    account_id: accounts[0].accountId,
    public_key: accounts[0].publicKey.toString(),
  }),
]);

const signedTx = await window.near.wallet.signTransaction({
  transaction: transactions.createTransaction(
    accounts[0].accountId,
    accounts[0].publicKey,
    "guest-book.testnet",
    accessKey.nonce + 1,
    [transactions.functionCall(
      "addMessage",
      { text: "Hello World!" },
      utils.format.parseNearAmount("0.00000000003"),
      utils.format.parseNearAmount("0.01")
    )],
    utils.serialize.base_decode(block.header.hash)
  ),
});

// Send the transaction to the blockchain.
await provider.sendTransaction(signedTx);
```

##### `signTransactions`

Sign a list of transactions. This request should require explicit approval from the user.

```ts

> import { transactions, providers, utils } from "near-api-js";
> import { AccessKeyView } from "near-api-js/lib/providers/provider";
> 
> // Retrieve accounts (assuming already connected) and current network.
> const { network, accounts } = window.near.wallet;
> 
> // Setup RPC to retrieve transaction-related prerequisites.
> const provider = new providers.JsonRpcProvider({ url: network.nodeUrl });
> 
> const [block, accessKey] = await Promise.all([
>   provider.block({ finality: "final" }),
>   provider.query<AccessKeyView>({
>     request_type: "view_access_key",
>     finality: "final",
>     account_id: accounts[0].accountId,
>     public_key: accounts[0].publicKey.toString(),
>   }),
> ]);
> 
> const signedTxs = await window.near.wallet.signTransactions({
>   transactions: [
>     transactions.createTransaction(
>       accounts[0].accountId,
>       accounts[0].publicKey,
>       "guest-book.testnet",
>       accessKey.nonce + 1,
>       [transactions.functionCall(
>         "addMessage",
>         { text: "Hello World! (1/2)" },
>         utils.format.parseNearAmount("0.00000000003"),
>         utils.format.parseNearAmount("0.01")
>       )],
>       utils.serialize.base_decode(block.header.hash)
>     ),
>     transactions.createTransaction(
>       accounts[0].accountId,
>       accounts[0].publicKey,
>       "guest-book.testnet",
>       accessKey.nonce + 2,
>       [transactions.functionCall(
>         "addMessage",
>         { text: "Hello World! (2/2)" },
>         utils.format.parseNearAmount("0.00000000003"),
>         utils.format.parseNearAmount("0.01")
>       )],
>       utils.serialize.base_decode(block.header.hash)
>     )
>   ]
> });

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
import { transactions, providers, utils } from "near-api-js";

// Retrieve accounts (assuming already connected) and current network.
const { network, accounts } = window.near.wallet;

// Setup RPC to retrieve transaction-related prerequisites.
const provider = new providers.JsonRpcProvider({ url: network.nodeUrl });

const signedTxs = await window.near.wallet.signTransactions({
  transactions: [
    {
        signerId: accounts[0].accountId,
        receiverId: "guest-book.testnet",
        actions: [transactions.functionCall(
            "addMessage",
            { text: "Hello World! (1/2)" },
            utils.format.parseNearAmount("0.00000000003"),
            utils.format.parseNearAmount("0.01")
        )]
    },
    {
        signerId: accounts[0].accountId,
        receiverId: "guest-book.testnet",
        actions: [transactions.functionCall(
            "addMessage",
            { text: "Hello World! (2/2)" },
            utils.format.parseNearAmount("0.00000000003"),
            utils.format.parseNearAmount("0.01")
        )]
    }
  ]
}); 
```

## Rationale and alternatives

At its most basic, a wallet contains key pairs required to sign messages. This standard aims to define an API (based on our learning from [Wallet Selector](https://github.com/near/wallet-selector)) that achieves this requirement through a number of methods exposed on the `window` object.

The introduction of this standard makes it possible for `near-api-js` to become wallet-agnostic and eventually move away from the high amount of coupling with NEAR Wallet. It simplifies projects such as [Wallet Selector](https://github.com/near/wallet-selector) that must implement various abstractions to normalise the different APIs before it can display a modal for selecting a wallet.

This standard takes a different approach to a wallet API than other blockchains such as [Ethereum's JSON-RPC Methods](https://docs.metamask.io/guide/rpc-api.html#ethereum-json-rpc-methods). Mainly, it rejects the `request` abstraction that feels unnecessary and only adds to the complexity both in terms of implementation and types. Instead, it exposes various methods directly on the top-level object that also improves discoverability.

> There has been many iterations of this standard to help inform what we consider the "best" approach right now for NEAR. Below is a summary of the key design choices:

Author: :+1: fixed!

- It future-proofs the API even if wallets (such as MetaMask) only support a single "active" account.
- Other blockchains such as [Ethereum](https://docs.metamask.io/guide/rpc-api.html#eth-requestaccounts) implement this model.
- Access to multiple accounts allow dApps more freedom to improve UX as users can seamlessly switch between accounts.
- Aligns with WalletConnect via the [Bridge Wallet Standard](./BridgeWallets.md).

### Store key pairs of FunctionCall access keys in dApp vs. wallet

NEAR's unique concept of `FunctionCall` access keys makes it possible for dApps to execute transactions without having to prompt the user each time. This limited access means they can be shared with relatively low risk, provided gas allowance and method names are appropriately defined.

There has been mixed views on exactly who should store these key pairs as there are trade-off to be considered with either option:

> - Storing key pairs in the wallet means users have a contextual view of which dApps have limited access to their accounts. However, this can be solved through improvements to the `view_access_key` endpoints to include a description and/or url that helps users make a more informed decision on whether they want to remove it.

Author: Good question... this paragraph was a bit confusing and the reference to metadata for access keys isn't directly relevant to this NEP.  Adding metadata to access keys would be a core chain NEP proposal which we would then integrate with this NEP where applicable.  This was alluding to the fact that _if_ the wallet held on to both types of keys, the wallet could show the user a list of keys that were used to sign in -- but that is possible _anyway_ without the wallet holding on to the private key in the pair -- for example, the near wallet UI displays all FunctionCall keys on an account without holding any of their private keys, and could track and display any metadata it wanted about keys that were adding by using the near wallet UI without ever knowing the private keys involved in each sign-in.  I'm re-writing this to be clearer :+1: thanks for the feedback

- Although risk is limited with `FunctionCall` access keys, storing key pairs in the dApp means a level of trust is required to ensure they're kept securely to avoid being compromised.
- Signing transactions that match the `FunctionCall` access key stored in the dApp means we don't require connection to a wallet. This is particularly useful for wallets such as Ledger and WalletConnect where it isn't always available. The drawback to this approach is the dApp must handle much of the logic found already in the wallet such as storing key pairs and matching applicable access keys during signing.

> Although we had some technical challenges, the decision to store the key pairs in the dApp means users own them and gas-only intensive `FunctionCall` dApps work seamlessly with wallets that aren't always available. The expectation for `near-api-js` to become wallet-agnostic will reduce the complexity shifted onto the dApp as it can abstract away the logic required for handling the key pairs and only defer to the wallet when further permission is needed.

Author: :+1: agreed! editing.

> A side effect to this approach (coupled with multiple accounts) means we must generate the key pairs ahead of time and pass each public key to the `signIn` method as a list of `accounts`. The introduction of the `connect` and `disconnect` methods allows dApps to request visibility for a subset of accounts imported in the wallet to help populate this list and sign transactions.

Author: Re-wording this paragraph :)

## Specification

> Injected wallets are browser extensions that implement the `Wallet` API (see below) on the `window` object. To avoid namespace collisions and easily detect when they're available, wallets will mount under their own key within `window.near` (e.g. `window.near.sender`).

Author: Yep! I'll clarify that wording to be more explicit

### Wallet API

Below is the entire API for injected wallets. It makes use of `near-api-js` to enable interoperability with dApps that will already use it for constructing transactions and communicating with RPC endpoints.

```ts
import { transactions, utils } from "near-api-js";

interface Account {
  accountId: string;
  publicKey: utils.PublicKey;
}

interface Network {
  networkId: string;
  nodeUrl: string;
}

interface SignInParams {
  permission: transactions.FunctionCallPermission;
  accounts: Array<Account>;
}

interface SignOutParams {
  accounts: Array<Account>;
}

interface SignTransactionParams {
  transaction: transactions.Transaction;
}

interface SignTransactionsParams {
  transactions: Array<transactions.Transaction>;
}

interface Events {
  accountsChanged: { accounts: Array<Account> };
  networkChanged: { network: Network };
}

type Unsubscribe = () => void;

interface Wallet {
  id: string;
  connected: boolean;
  network: Network;

>   accounts: Array<Account>;

Reviewer 4: Why use an array over an object hash here?

Author: It was the simplest way to allow wallet implementors to be able to control which account would be 'first' in the list of accounts to sign in as or sign transactions for :)

  signTransactions(params: SignTransactionsParams): Promise<Array<transactions.SignedTransaction>>;
  disconnect(): Promise<void>;
  on<EventName extends keyof Events>(
    event: EventName,
    callback: (params: Events[EventName]) => void
  ): Unsubscribe;
  off<EventName extends keyof Events>(
    event: EventName,
    callback?: () => void
  ): void;
}
```

#### Properties

##### `id`

Retrieve the wallet's unique identifier.

```ts
const { id } = window.near.wallet;

console.log(id) // "wallet"
```

##### `connected`

Determine whether we're already connected to the wallet and have visibility of at least one account.

```ts
const { connected } = window.near.wallet;

console.log(connected) // true
```

##### `network`

Retrieve the currently selected network.

```ts
const { network } = window.near.wallet;

console.log(network) // { networkId: "testnet", nodeUrl: "https://rpc.testnet.near.org" }
```

##### `accounts`

Retrieve all accounts visible to the dApp.

```ts
const { accounts } = window.near.wallet;

console.log(accounts) // [{ accountId: "test.testnet", publicKey: PublicKey }]
```

#### Methods

> ##### `connect`

Reviewer 4: What should happen when another method is called before the first invocation of `connect`?

Author: Since the spec requires an account ID be provided for other actions such as `signIn` and `signTransaction`, the dApp / consumer of this API would typically not know which account ID to use for the payloads for those methods unless they have called `connect()` previously to identify which account IDs are supported by the currently selected  wallet.

We do not explicitly _require_ that `connect` is _always_ called before the other methods to facilitate cases where the dApp might use cached data from a prior wallet connection call, or data from another external source to compose payloads for the other methods.

```ts
import { utils, keyStores } from "near-api-js";

// Setup keystore to retrieve locally stored FunctionCall access keys.
const keystore = new keyStores.BrowserLocalStorageKeyStore();

// Retrieve accounts (assuming already connected) and current network.
const { network, accounts } = window.near.wallet;

// Remove FunctionCall access (previously granted via signIn) for each account.
await window.near.wallet.signOut({
  accounts: await Promise.all(
    accounts.map(async ({ accountId }) => {
      const keyPair = await keystore.getKey(network.networkId, accountId);

      return {
        accountId,
        publicKey: keyPair.getPublicKey()
      };
    })
  ),
});
```

#### Events

##### `accountsChanged`

Triggered whenever accounts are updated (e.g. calling `connect` or `disconnect`).

```ts
window.near.wallet.on("accountsChanged", ({ accounts }) => {
  console.log("Accounts Changed", accounts);
});
```

##### `networkChanged`

Triggered whenever the wallet changes network.

```ts
window.near.wallet.on("networkChanged", ({ network }) => {
  console.log("Network Changed", network);
});
```

## Drawbacks

> There are cases when a dApp wants to sign a transaction with a signer that's yet to be determined (e.g. "Donate" button). Using the `Transaction` instance from `near-api-js` sadly limits this possibility as it requires the details of a `signerId` and `publicKey` upfront. Below are suggested solutions:

Reviewer 4: > Using the `Transaction` instance from `near-api-js` sadly limits this possibility as it requires the details of a `signerId` and `publicKey` upfront.

Reads more succinct as

> The `Transaction` class from `near-api-js` precludes this behavior as it must be instantiated with both `signerId` and `publicKey`.

Author: :+1: Good call! :)
